0.16.0 (#1566)
apollographql/router: CHANGELOG.md

This project adheres to [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html).

# [0.16.0] - 2022-08-22

## ❗ BREAKING ❗

### Remove QueryPlannerService ([PR #1552](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1552))

This service was redundant, since anything done as part of the `QueryPlannerService` could be done either at the `SupergraphService` or at the `ExecutionService` level.

> By [@o0Ignition0o](https://github.com/o0Ignition0o)

Reviewer: Sometimes we have pattern like `By [...](...) in URL_OF_THE_PR` what's the good way ?

Author: I thought it was there to show the list of contributors in the release page, but the last time it worked was for 0.14?
@abernix any context on that?

Reviewer 2: I suggested the `in URL_OF_THE_PR` on a lot of the requests below.  Unfortunately, to make the contributors list work, this format has to be edited manually searched and replaced be _real_ `@mentions` when copying and pasting the contents into the GitHub release.  So yet another thing to automate.

(The other side of the coin is that, frustratingly, bare `@mention`s don't work in the `CHANGELOG.md` itself, which is why the link format is nice so it's clickable — and to keep track of the authors. 😭 )

apollo_router::plugins
apollo_router::plugin::plugins
apollo_router::plugin::PluginFactory
apollo_router::plugin::DynPlugin
apollo_router::plugin::Handler
apollo_router::plugin::test::IntoSchema
apollo_router::plugin::test::MockSubgraphFactory
apollo_router::plugin::test::PluginTestHarness
apollo_router::query_planner::QueryPlan::execute
apollo_router::services
apollo_router::Schema
```

By [@SimonSapin](https://github.com/SimonSapin)

### Router startup API changes ([PR #1487](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1487))

The `RouterHttpServer::serve` method and its return type `RouterHandle` were removed,
their functionality merged into `RouterHttpServer` (formerly `ApolloRouter`).
The builder for `RouterHttpServer` now ends with a `start` method instead of `build`.
This method immediatly starts the server in a new Tokio task.

```diff
 RouterHttpServer::builder()
     .configuration(configuration)
     .schema(schema)
-    .build()
-    .serve()
+    .start()
     .await
```

By [@SimonSapin](https://github.com/SimonSapin)

### `router_builder_fn` replaced by `shutdown` in the `Executable` builder ([PR #1487](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1487))

> The builder for `apollo_router::Executable` had a `router_builder_fn` method
> allowing to specify how a `RouterHttpServer` (previously `ApolloRouter`) was to be created
> with a provided configuration and schema.
> The only possible variation there was specifying when the server should shut down
> with a `ShutdownSource` parameter,
> so `router_builder_fn` was replaced with a new `shutdown` method that takes that.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The builder for `apollo_router::Executable` had a `router_builder_fn` method
allowing the specification of how a `RouterHttpServer` (previously `ApolloRouter`) was to be created
with a provided configuration and schema.
Since the only possible variation was specifying _when_ the server should shut down
(with a `ShutdownSource` parameter) the `router_builder_fn` was replaced with a new `shutdown` method.
```

By [@o0Ignition0o](https://github.com/o0Ignition0o)

### Expose query plan in extensions for GraphQL response (experimental) ([PR #1470](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1470))

Expose query plan in extensions for GraphQL response. Only experimental for now, no documentation available.

By [@bnjjj](https://github.com/bnjjj) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1470

### Add support of global rate limit and timeout. [PR #1347](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1347)

Additions to the traffic shaping plugin:
- **Global rate limit** - If you want to rate limit requests to subgraphs or to the router itself.
- **Timeout**: - Set a timeout to subgraphs and router requests.

```yaml
traffic_shaping:
  router: # Rules applied to requests from clients to the router
    global_rate_limit: # Accept a maximum of 10 requests per 5 secs. Excess requests must be rejected.
      capacity: 10

>       interval: 5s # Must not be greater than 18_446_744_073_709_551_615 milliseconds and not less than 0 milliseconds

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      interval: 5s # Value in milliseconds must be greater than 0 and less than the max of a 64-bit integer (2^64-1).
```

    timeout: 50s # If a request to the router takes more than 50secs then cancel the request (30 sec by default)
  subgraphs: # Rules applied to requests from the router to individual subgraphs
    products:
      global_rate_limit: # Accept a maximum of 10 requests per 5 secs from the router. Excess requests must be rejected.
        capacity: 10

>         interval: 5s # Must not be greater than 18_446_744_073_709_551_615 milliseconds and not less than 0 milliseconds

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        interval: 5s # Value in milliseconds must be greater than 0 and less than the max of a 64-bit integer (2^64-1).
```

      timeout: 50s # If a request to the subgraph 'products' takes more than 50secs then cancel the request (30 sec by default)
```

By [@bnjjj](https://github.com/bnjjj) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1347

### Explicit `shutdown` for `RouterHttpServer` handle ([PR #1487](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1487))

If you explicitly create a `RouterHttpServer` handle,
dropping it while the server is running instructs the server shut down gracefuly.
However with the handle dropped, there is no way to wait for shutdown to end
or check that it went without error.
Instead, the new `shutdown` async method can be called explicitly
to obtain a `Result`:

```diff
 use RouterHttpServer;
 let server = RouterHttpServer::builder().schema("schema").start();
 // …
-drop(server);
+server.shutdown().await.unwrap(); 
```

> By [@SimonSapin](https://github.com/SimonSapin)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By [@SimonSapin](https://github.com/SimonSapin) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1487
```

### Added `apollo_router::TestHarness` ([PR #1487](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1487))

This is a builder for the part of an Apollo Router that handles GraphQL requests,
as a `tower::Service`.
This allows tests, benchmarks, etc
to manipulate request and response objects in memory without going over the network.
See the API documentation for an example. (It can be built with `cargo doc --open`.)

> By [@SimonSapin](https://github.com/SimonSapin)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By [@SimonSapin](https://github.com/SimonSapin) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1487
```

> ### Remove telemetry configuration hot reloading ([PR #1501](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1501))
> 

Reviewer 2: @Geal This header is not matching the text (removing hot-reloading still exists above in breaking changes).  Maybe we want this:

```suggestion
### Introduce `map_deferred_response` method for deferred responses ([PR #1501](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1501))

```

Author: right, good catch

The `map_deferred_response` method is now available for the router service and execution
service in Rhai. When using the `@defer` directive, we get the data in a serie of graphql
responses. The first one is available with the `map_response` method, where the HTTP headers
and the response body can be modified. The following responses are available through
`map_deferred_response`, which only has access to the response body.

By [@geal](https://github.com/geal) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1501

## 🐛 Fixes

> ### Variables validation: return a 400 if variables validation fails ([#1403](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/1403))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Return HTTP status code 400 when `variables` validation fails ([Issue #1403](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/1403))
```

> Failure to validate variables against a query and a schema will now return an HTTP 400.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Failure to validate out-of-band `variables` against both the `query` and the corresponding schema will now return in an HTTP status code of 400 being returned to the client.  This instructs the client not to bother retrying without changing something about what it previously sent since subsequent retries would just fail validation again and again.
```

By [@o0Ignition0o](https://github.com/o0Ignition0o)

> ### Expose query plan: move the behavior to the execution_service ([#1541](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/1541))
> 
> There isn't much use for QueryPlanner plugins. Most of the logic done there can be done in `execution_service`. Moreover users could get inconsistent plugin behavior because it depends on whether the QueryPlanner cache hits or not.
> 
> By [@o0Ignition0o](https://github.com/o0Ignition0o)
> 

Reviewer 2: I would suggest we remove this from this part of the changelog.  We've already talked about it above (both in the expose part and the removal of the query planner service.)

```suggestion
```

### Include usage reporting data in the context even when the query plan has been cached ([#1559](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/1559))

Include usage reporting data in the context even when the query plan has been cached when calling `CachingQueryPlanner`.

By [@bnjjj](https://github.com/bnjjj) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1559

> ### Accept SIGTERM as shutdown signal ([PR #1497](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1497))
> 
> This will make containers stop faster as they will not have to wait until a SIGKILL to stop the router.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Accept `SIGTERM` as shutdown signal ([PR #1497](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1497))

This will make containers stop faster as they will not have to wait until a `SIGKILL` to stop the router (which generally comes several seconds later).
```

By [@Geal](https://github.com/Geal) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1497

> ### Set the response path for deferred responses ([PR #1529](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1529))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Set the response `path` for deferred responses ([PR #1529](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1529))
```

> Some GraphQL clients rely on the response path to find out which
> fragment created a deferred response, and generate code that checks the
> type of the value at that path.
> Previously the router was generating a value that starts at the root
> for every deferred response. Now it checks the path returned by the query
> plan execution and creates a response for each value that matches that
> path.
> In particular, for deferred fragments on an ojbect inside an array, it
> will create a separate response for each element of the array.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some GraphQL clients rely on the response `path` to find out which
fragment created a deferred response, and generate code that checks the
type of the value at that path.
Previously the router was generating a value that starts at the root
for every deferred response. Now it checks the `path` returned by the query
plan execution and creates a response for each value that matches that
path.
In particular, for deferred fragments on an object inside an array, it
will create a separate response for each element of the array.
```

By [@Geal](https://github.com/Geal) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1529

### Activate defer support in introspection ([PR #1557](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1557))

Introspection queries will now see the `@defer` directive if it was activated in the configuration file.

By [@Geal](https://github.com/Geal) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1557

### Support the incremental response field ([PR #1551](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1551))

Recent changes in the `@defer` specification now mandate that the deferred responses are transmitted
as an array in the new `incremental` field of the JSON response.

By [@Geal](https://github.com/Geal) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1551

> ## 🛠 Maintenance

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## 🛠 Maintenance

These are generally internal improvements to the Router repository on GitHub.
```

> ### Display licenses.html diff in CI if the check failed ([#1524](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/1524))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Display `licenses.html` diff in CI if the check failed ([#1524](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/1524))
```

The CI check that ensures that the `license.html` file is up to date now displays what has changed when the file is out of sync.

By [@o0Ignition0o](https://github.com/o0Ignition0o)

## 🚀 Features

### Helm: Rhai script and Istio virtualservice support ([#1478](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/1478))

You can now pass a Rhai script file to the helm chart.

> You can also provide an Istio VirtualService configuration, as well as custom Egress rules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also provide an Istio `VirtualService` configuration, as well as custom `Egress` rules.
```

Head over to the helm chart [default values](https://github.com/apollographql/router/blob/main/helm/chart/router/values.yaml) to get started.

> By [@o0Ignition0o](https://github.com/o0Ignition0o)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By [@o0Ignition0o](https://github.com/o0Ignition0o) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/1478
```
